AQA English Literature GCSE
Macbeth: Themes
Guilt, Innocence and Paranoia
Guilt, Innocence, & Paranoia
Though it is the Macbeths’
unchecked, amoral ambition​ that
causes their ​fall from grace​, it is
their ​guilt and paranoia ​that ​breaks
them​. Without guilt, they wouldn’t be
driven insane​ by their deeds.
Without paranoia, their murder spree
might have begun and ended with
Duncan’s death.

Context
Killing a king was a ​provocative
subject when ‘Macbeth’ was first
being written and performed.
Elizabeth I had died without an heir,
so James VI of Scotland was made
the new king of England. This raised a lot of questions about whether he was the ​rightful
monarch, and who should be allowed to be king.
This ​political tension amounted in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605​, where a group tried to
assassinate James and members of Parliament. As the king was the patron of
Shakespeare’s theatre group, it was important that he pleased him. By illustrating how
violently and deeply guilt destroyed the Macbeths, Shakespeare is clearly ​condemning
regicide.

Religion
Jacobean Britain was a​ very religious, Christian country​. People believed God was
all-seeing​, so would see every sin and crime someone committed. No one was ​exempt
from His judgement. Shakespeare supports this idea by showing how the Macbeths are put
through a sort of hell, despite their crime not being known by anyone else.
The Renaissance was also a period when people believed in the innate (natural) goodness
of humanity. The Macbeths are destroyed by their own guilt, suggesting their ​innate
goodness​ ​rebelled against their deliberate immorality​.
Innocence, in contrast, is a ​virtue ​that Shakespeare, in keeping with Christianity, celebrates.
The Macbeths pursue a ​facade of innocence​ while plotting their murders, and as they
descend further into their web of violence, they long to ​regain ​their lost innocence. Malcolm,
a posterboy of youthful innocence and virtue, is the rightful king of Scotland, showing how
goodness is the correct way to be given power.
Macbeth
Though both are troubled deeply by their guilt, the Macbeths’ experiences of it and reactions
to it are very ​different​, and reveal their differences in ​character​.
Macbeth’s guilt is focused on the murder, as he expresses his greatest remorse directly
before and after he kills Duncan. After that, his guilt comes in the form of ​paranoia​, and this
sends him on a ​frenzied murder spree​. Shakespeare suggests ​guilt and conscience are
more powerful than ambition​.
Guilt and religion
Shakespeare associates ​guilt with religion​. While wondering if he should really kill Duncan,
Macbeth acknowledges, ​“We’d jump the life to come,” (1.7)​. This is a reference to the
afterlife​, which Christians believed would be granted to those who ​honoured God​. Macbeth
knows committing murder will ​sacrifice his life in Heaven​, making him fully ​mortal ​and
abandoned by God​. The threat of this is enough to make Macbeth reconsider his plan,
showing the power religion and belief had over people at the time. Shakespeare suggests
Macbeth should have listened to his ​conscience and faith​ rather than to his wife.
Shakespeare shows the ​moral and religious consequences ​of being guilty.
Macbeth continues, ​“But wherefore could not I pronounce ‘Amen’? / I had most need of
blessing and ‘Amen’ / Stuck in my throat,” (2.2)​. He is deeply distressed and upset by
this experience. It seems Macbeth is scared because he has been​ denied God’s
forgiveness​, so knows he is ​damned​. The phrase​ “I had most need of blessing”​ reveals
his ​regret​, for he is desperate to ​reclaim his innocence​. The ​metaphor​ “stuck in my
throat”​ evokes the image of a ​barrier blocking Macbeth from God​.

Guilt is presented as an intense fear of knowing yourself and facing what you have done.
After killing Duncan, he claims, ​“To know my deed, ‘twere best not know my self,” (2.2)​.
The perception of himself as an ​honourable hero​ has died along with Duncan. He would
rather be ​unconscious ​or ​forget who he is​ than look at what he’s done.
Regret
Macbeth’s regret is echoed later in the play, when Ross says of Scotland,​ “Alas, poor
country, / Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot / Be called our mother, but our
grave,” (4.3).​ Shakespeare shows how Macbeth’s ​guilt​ has clouded the country in
uncertainty and weakness. Ross suggests Scotland is​ “almost afraid to know itself”
because ​it cannot face what it has become​. The same is true of Macbeth himself,
meaning the king and his country are ​identical​.
Paranoia
Paranoia ​is portrayed as a ​poison ​that is ​relentless ​and ​inescapable​. Macbeth ​loses​ all
his ​heroic qualities​ because of his fears, and he becomes murderous even as he descends
into madness. He says, ​“For Banquo’s issue have I filed my mind; / For them, the
gracious Duncan have I murdered, / Put rancours in the vessel of my peace / Only for
them,” (3.1)​. Shakespeare shows that​ ​Macbeth’s ambition is punished, not rewarded. The
metaphor​ “put rancours in the vessel of my peace” ​suggests his guilt and paranoia has
polluted ​his soul. Similar ​imagery of c​orruption ​is used as the play continues:​ “O, full of
scorpions is my mind,” (3.2)​, presenting his paranoia as ​infinite, small stings​.

Lady Macbeth
Unlike her husband, Lady Macbeth is initially ​free from any feelings of guilt​. Her journey in
the play takes her ​from power and strength ​to ​weakness and insanity​. Whereas
Macbeth’s guilt makes him more
violent and brutal, Lady Macbeth’s guilt
makes her go into herself. She closes
herself off to everyone else, cannot be
in darkness, and sleep walks as she is
trapped in her own guilty thoughts. The
way her guilt ​takes over is gradual
but destructive​, showing how even
the most ​callous ​(insensitive and
cruel) and cold people​ ​aren’t immune
to God’s judgement and their own
human conscience.
Rejecting femininity
Guilt and regret are presented as
obstacles to following ambition​. These two feelings are linked to femininity and thus Lady
Macbeth tries to rid herself of her conscience when she calls upon ​“spirits”​ to ​“unsex”​ her.
She demands that they: ​“Stop up th’access and passage to remorse / That no
compunctious visitings of nature / Shake my fell purpose nor keep peace between /
Th’effect and it,” (1.5).​ This indicates that she is ​capable ​of feeling guilt, but wants torepress ​these feelings because she views them as ​weaknesses​. The only way to overcome
guilt is to not feel it, as Shakespeare implies​ guilt is too powerful to ignore​.
Cost of guilt
The ​cost ​of Lady Macbeth’s guilt is shown to be endless paranoia. She says to herself,
“Nought’s had, all’s spent / Where our desire is got without content. / ‘Tis safer to be
that which we destroy / Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy,” (3.2),​ which
suggests she ​envies ​the dead for their ​peace of mind​. ​“All’s spent”​ illustrates how there is
a ​cost ​for being guilty of a crime, and may also allude to her mental exhaustion - she is
“spent”​. Lady Macbeth is becoming aware of the ​infinite cycle of violence ​they have got
themselves into to ​satisfy their paranoia​. Shakespeare shows that sins and crimes are
never rewarded, so that the perpetrators are only left with their ​remorse​.
Shakespeare demonstrates how guilt and regret can’t be ​escaped​. Lady Macbeth tells her
worried husband, ​“What’s done, is done,” (3.2)​, suggesting they ​can’t change their fate
and will just have to live with the consequences​. Shakespeare suggests that greed and
ambition​ ​can’t predict the guilt that comes with making fantasies into reality. The line
becomes a ​refrain ​for her, as later she mutters to herself in her sleep,​ “What’s done
cannot be undone,” (5.1)​. The ​repetition​ makes it appear like she is trying to ​convince
herself to let go and get the courage to face reality. The change from ​“is done”​ to ​“cannot
be undone”​ gives the impression that her guilt and desperation have ​increased​.

Blood & Hallucinations
Blood ​is a ​symbol of guilt and
death​ in Macbeth. The Macbeths
can’t escape it no matter how
much they try to wash it away.
Hallucinations ​and ​ghosts ​are
also​ symbols of guilt and death​,
as they point to the​ existence of
an Afterlife​ and the invisible
world of the ​supernatural​.
Blood as a motif
Blood is a ​motif ​used throughout
the play to show how the
Macbeths ​react ​to their guilt. They both react differently to the blood which reveals to the
audience how differently their minds work.
Lady Macbeth believes that the simple act of washing their hands will rid them of both the
physical blood but also the mental guilt of their deed. She orders her husband, ​“Go get
some water / And wash this filthy witness from your hand,” (2.2)​, echoing this later,​ “A
little water clears us of this deed,” (2.2)​. Here, ​“water” ​is a ​symbol of purity and life​.
She isn’t focused on what the murder says about them or the mental impact it will have, onlythe implications of if they get caught with blood on their hands. She worries that it will
implicate ​them in the murder as a​ “witness”​, so tells Macbeth to ​“wash”​ it away. At the
same time, she only refers to blood with the ​euphemisms ​“filthy witness”​ and​ “deed”​,
suggesting she can’t ​confront ​the reality of her actions.
In contrast, Macbeth is ​shocked ​by the blood on his hands, asking, ​“Will all great
Neptune’s ocean wash this blood / Clean from my hand? No: this my hand will rather /
The multitudinous seas incarnadine, / Making the green
one red,” (2.2)​. He knows their guilt goes beyond the​ literal
“blood”​ on their ​“hand[s]”,​ and that nothing can remove
the ​metaphorical​ ​“blood”​ on their souls. The reference to
“Neptune”​, a ​non-Christian god​, could reflect how he has
turned his back on God.
Macbeth’s hallucinations
Macbeth is faced with the ​reality ​of his guilt in the form of
blood-soaked hallucinations​. A dagger dripping with blood
leads the way to Duncan’s sleeping form, a ​premonition ​of
the violence and guilt to come, while Banquo’s ghost points
his bloodied finger at Macbeth in an ​accusation ​of
responsibility. Macbeth’s famous ​soliloquy ​opens, ​“Is this a
dagger which I see before me, / The handle toward my
hand?” (2.1)​. The question shows that Macbeth ​cannot tell
the difference between what is real and what is
imagined​, suggesting his guilt has already taken hold.

Macbeth asks,​ “Art thou but / A dagger of the mind, a false creation, / Proceeding from
the heat-oppressed brain?” (2.1)​ , suggesting he is aware that he can’t t​ rust e
​ verything he
sees. At the same time, though, he isn’t sure if the dagger is from his​ “mind”​ or not,
implying he doesn’t know what his mind is ​capable ​of. It seems his​ inability to cope with
guilt​ makes him hallucinate. The a
​ djective ​“heat-oppressed”​ refers to the ​pressure ​guilt
places on you. It connotes a fever, portraying ​guilt as a disease​.
Shakespeare presents guilt as an ​intense psychological torture​ that makes reality break

down. Mental illnesses, such as the psychosis Macbeth is experiencing, weren’t understood
in Shakespeare’s time. It was common to think the mentally ill were ​possessed​.
At first, Lady Macbeth is ​dismissive ​of Macbeth’s hallucinations, telling him​ “‘Tis the eye of
childhood / That fears a painted devil,” (2.2)​ and his​ “flaws and starts” ​ are merely
“impostors to true fear” (3.4)​ . In her final scene however, she is ​tormented ​by her own
visions. She cries, ​“Out, damned spot!” (5.1)​ , showing she is trying to wash her hands of
an invisible spot of blood. Its invisibility reflects how ​guilt doesn’t have to be visible or
known by others for it to be real​: she knows her own guilt and cannot unlearn it.
Sleep
Shakespeare uses ​sleep ​as a
symbol of innocence and peace​,
it brings ​comfort​ and is an escape
from the troubles of the real world.
Sleep is also used to express and
reveal ​the subconscious and the
conscience​. Thus, sleep is ​denied
to the Macbeths after they murder
Duncan. Instead, their nights are
plagued ​by nightmares and
“restless ecstasy” (3.2),​
suggesting they ​relive ​their crimes
every time they close their eyes.
When the Macbeths murder Duncan, Shakespeare shows they have ​sacrificed ​any chance
of ​serenity and well-being​. It is concluded, ​“Macbeth shall sleep no more,” (2.2)​. As well
as being the ​villain​, Macbeth realises he has ​damned himself​. He ​“shall sleep no more”​,
so ​he has brought torment and torture on himself​. Shakespeare shows how those who
are guilty of sins are ​self-destructive​. Macbeth sleeping ​“no more” ​is a ​symbol of his
active, haunted conscience​. Sleep is ​“innocent”​, a ​“balm of hurt minds”,​ so​ it cannot
be enjoyed by a murderer​ bathed in blood, as Macbeth is.
Insomnia
Macbeth’s ​insomnia ​takes its toll on him, so that he longs for some ​semblance ​of peace,
even death. He says, ​“Better be with the dead / Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent
to peace, / Than on the torture of the mind to lie / In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his
grave. / After life’s fitful fever, he sleeps well,” (3.2),​ suggesting his attempts to feel
content have only brought him more pain. Here Macbeth envies the​ “dead”​ and clearly
mistakes death for a form of ​“sleep”​, which implies​ ​murder and death has taken over his
mindset.
Lady Macbeth’s sleep is ​disturbed ​by sleep walking, suggesting her mind is always racing.
The Doctor notes, ​“A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of
sleep and do the effects of watching,” (5.1)​, suggesting Lady Macbeth is ​doomed ​to
always ​“watch”​ the murder be ​replayed​.
Light vs. Dark
Shakespeare uses​ imagery of light and darkness​ to explore​ guilt and innocence​. Light is
a​ symbol of innocence, ​enlightenment, and often ​holiness​, whereas ​darkness ​is
associated with the ​evil spirits that call for foul murder​. Often, light and darkness indicate
which characters are guilty and which can be trusted.
Darkness used to conceal
Both of the Macbeths call upon ​darkness ​to ​mask ​their crimes. The darkness could be
reflective of them turning their back on God and goodness and instead siding with temptation
and the devil.
When the idea of murdering Duncan first comes to Macbeth, he says in an ​aside​,​ “Stars,
hide your fires, / Let not light see my black and deep desires, / The eye wink at the
hand. Yet let that be, / Which the eye fears when it is done to see,” (1.4)​. Duncan
already established ​“stars”​ as ​“signs of nobleness”​, so Macbeth is ​using the darkness
to protect his innocent reputation​.
➔ The phrase​ “black and deep desires” ​evokes an​ images of decay​, and suggests
Macbeth is ​aware of his immorality while he nurtures it​. By asking the​ “stars”​ to
“hide [their] fires”​, it seems Macbeth is more concerned with ​avoiding judgement
than embracing darkness.
➔ “Let not light see” a
​ nd ​“Yet let that be, / Which the eye fears” s​ uggests​ the
darkness is for his own benefit​. He can’t ​bear ​to look at what he is going to do,
even though he wants it to happen.
Lady Macbeth has a similar request when she
says, ​“Come, thick night, / And pall thee in
the dunnest smoke of hell, / That my keen
knife sees not the wound it makes, / Nor
heaven peep through the blanket of the
dark,” (1.5)​. She asks directly for​ “thick night”
and​ “the dunnest smoke of hell”​, meaning
she is calling upon​ forces of darkness ​to help
her be wicked, whereas Macbeth is more
concerned with avoiding​ “light” t​ o ​preserve
his ‘pure’ soul. However, Lady Macbeth does
reveal she is concerned about ​discovery​,
wanting to stop​ “heaven peep[ing] through
the blanket of the dark”.​

Development of the Theme
For Macbeth, his guilt and paranoia are ​constants ​that ​accompany ​him throughout the
play. As the play progresses, his guilt and paranoia ​worsens​. This is reflected in how
Macbeth’s language changes. He uses ​more Hellish, grotesque, and supernaturalimagery​. His ​obsession ​with death and mortality increases, and he makes ​repeated
references​ to his troubled mental state and lack of sleep. At the same time, he becomes
crueler and more brutal​.
For Lady Macbeth, on the other hand, her guilt and paranoia only ​manifest ​fully in her ​final
scenes​. At the start, she ​orchestrates ​the murder and ​silences ​all of Macbeth’s fears and
regrets. There are ​subtle indications ​that she isn’t as confident and cold as she wants to
seem, but her speech is ​controlled and cutting​. Eventually, she is completely unaware of
Macbeth’s actions. This ​division ​that forms both physically and mentally between the couple
portrays guilt as ​isolating​.
